---
title: Priority and Fairness for API Server Requests
authors:
  - "@MikeSpreitzer"
  - "@yue9944882"
owning-sig: sig-api-machinery
participating-sigs:
  - wg-multitenancy
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
editor: TBD
creation-date: 2019-02-28
last-updated: 2019-02-28
status: provisional
see-also: []
replaces: []
superseded-by: []
---

# Priority and Fairness for API Server Requests

## Table of Contents

Table of Contents
=================

   * [Priority and Fairness for API Server Requests](#priority-and-fairness-for-api-server-requests)
      * [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
      * [Release Signoff Checklist](#release-signoff-checklist)
      * [Summary](#summary)
      * [Motivation](#motivation)
         * [Goals](#goals)
         * [Non-Goals](#non-goals) 
         * [Future Goals](#future-goals) 
      * [Proposal](#proposal)
         * [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
         * [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
      * [Design Details](#design-details)
      * [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
      * [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
      * [Alternatives](#alternatives)
      * [Infrastructure Needed](#infrastructure-needed)


## Release Signoff Checklist

**ACTION REQUIRED:** In order to merge code into a release, there must be an issue in [kubernetes/enhancements] referencing this KEP and targeting a release milestone **before [Enhancement Freeze](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/tree/master/releases)
of the targeted release**.

For enhancements that make changes to code or processes/procedures in core Kubernetes i.e., [kubernetes/kubernetes], we require the following Release Signoff checklist to be completed.

Check these off as they are completed for the Release Team to track. These checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.

- [ ] kubernetes/enhancements issue in release milestone, which links to KEP (this should be a link to the KEP location in kubernetes/enhancements, not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] KEP approvers have set the KEP status to `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [ ] Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

**Note:** Any PRs to move a KEP to `implementable` or significant changes once it is marked `implementable` should be approved by each of the KEP approvers. If any of those approvers is no longer appropriate than changes to that list should be approved by the remaining approvers and/or the owning SIG (or SIG-arch for cross cutting KEPs).

**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://github.com/kubernetes/website

## Summary

This KEP generalizes the existing max-in-flight request handler in the
apiserver to make more distinctions among requests and provide
prioritization and fairness among the categories of requests.  An
outline of the request handling in an apiserver can be found at
https://speakerdeck.com/sttts/kubernetes-api-codebase-tour?slide=18 .

## Motivation

Today the apiserver has a simple mechanism for protectimg itself
against CPU and memory overloads: max-in-flight limits for mutating
and for readonly requests.  Apart from the distinction between
mutating and readonly, no other distinctions are made among requests;
consequently there can be undesirable scenarios where one subset of
the request load crowds out other parts of the request load.  Also,
the dispatching of these requests against two independent limits is
not
[work-conserving](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Work-conserving_scheduler).

### Goals

Following are some bad scenarios that can happen today and which
should be preventable when this KEP is in place.

- Self-Maintenance crowded out.  Some requests are for system
  self-maintenance, such as: node heartbeats, kubelet and kube-proxy
  work on pods, services, secrets, etc involved in the system's
  self-hosting, and leader elections for system controllers.  In an
  overload scenario today there is no assurance of priority for these
  self-maintenance requests.

- Priority Inversions.  In the course of serving request A, there are
  some other requests B spawned --- directly or indirectly.  One
  example is requests B that arrive over a loopback connection ---
  such as requests issued by an admission plugin (e.g., ResourceQuota)
  or any client-ish code in a registry strategy.  Another example is
  requests issued by an external server that itself is serving
  call-outs from an apiserver (e.g., admission web-hooks).  Other
  examples include requests from an aggregated apiserver to create
  TokenReview and SubjectAccessReview objects.  Today it is possible
  that the very load imposed by request A crowds out requests B
  involved in serving A.

- Garbage Collector crowded out.  The garbage collector should keep up
  with the workload, but in an overload situation today this is not
  assured to happen.

- Deployment of Doom.  We had a situation where a bug in the
  Deployment controller caused it to run amuck under certain
  circumstances, issuing requests in a tight loop.  We would like
  controller bugs to not take the whole system down.

- Kubelet Amuck.  The controller that runs amuck might not be a
  central singleton, it could be a kubelet, kube-proxy, or other
  per-node or otherwise multiplied controller.  In such a situtation
  we would like only the guilty individual to suffer, not all its
  peers and the rest of the system.

- Overbearing or buggy tenants.  In a multi-tenant scenario, we would
  like to prevent some tenants from crowding out the others.  Various
  usage scenarios involve identifying the tenant in the following
  ways.
  
  - Each tenant corresponds with a kube API namespace.

  - Each tenant corresponds with a user name.

  - Each tenant corresponds with a prefix of the user name.

  - Each tenant corresponds with a user's group.  Other groups may
    exist.  There is a subset of the groups that serve to identify
    tenants.  Each user belongs to exactly one of the
    tenant-identifying groups.

This KEP introduces new functionality in apiservers, and it should be
possible to monitor this functionality through Prometheus metrics
available from the apiservers.

This KEP introduces new configuration objects, and they really
matter; it should be easy to apply suitable access controls.

There should be some reasonable defaults.

### Non-Goals

This will be our first cut at a significant area of functionality, and
our goals are deliberately modest.  We want to implement something
useful but limited and get some experience before going further.  Our
precise modesty has not been fully agreed.  Following is an initial
stake in the ground.

- No coordination between apiservers nor with a load balancer is
  attempted.  In this KEP each apiserver independently protects
  itself.  We imagine that later developments may add support for
  informing load balancers about the load state of the apiservers.

- The fairness does not have to be highly precise.  Any rough fairness
  will be good enough.

- WATCH and CONNECT requests are out of scope.  These are of a fairly
  different nature than the others, and their management will be more
  complex.  Also they are arguably less of an observed problem.

- We are only concerned with protection of the CPU and memory of the
  apiserver.  We are not concerned with etcd performance, nor output
  network bandwidth, nor the ability of clients to consume output.

- This KEP will not attempt auto-tuning the capacity limit(s).  Instead
  the administrator will configure each apiserver's capacity limit(s),
  analogously to how the max-in-flight limits are configured today.

- This KEP will not attempt to reproduce the functionality of the
  existing event rate limiting admission plugin.  Events are a
  somewhat special case.  For now we intend to simply leave the
  existing admission plugin in place.

- This KEP will not attempt to protect against denial-of-service
  attacks at lower levels in the stack; it is only about what can be
  done at the identified point in the handler chain.

- This KEP does not introduce threading of additional information
  through webhooks and/or along other paths to support avoidance of
  priority inversions.  While that is an attractive thing to consider
  in the future, this KEP is deliberately limited in its ambition.
  The intent for this KEP is to document that for the case of requests
  that are secondary to some other requests the configuration should
  identify those secondary requests and give them sufficiently high
  priority to avoid priority inversion problems.  That will
  necessarily be conservative, and we settle for that now.

### Future Goals

To recap, there are some issues that we have decided not to address
yet but we think may be interesting to consider in the future.

- Helping load balancers do a better job, considering each apiserver's
  current load state.

- Do something about WATCH and/or CONNECT requests.

- React somehow to etcd overloads.

- Generate information to help something respond to downstream
  congestion.

- Auto-tune the resource limit(s) and/or request cost(s).

- Be more useful for events.

- Thread additional information along the paths needed to enable more
  precisely targeted avoidance of priority inversions.


## Proposal

See
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1c5SkLHvA4H25sY0lihJtu5ESHm36h786vi9LaQ8xdtY

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

TBD

### Risks and Mitigations

Implementing this KEP will increase the overhead in serving each
request, perhaps to a degree that depends on some measure of system
and/or workload size.  The additional overhead must be practically
limited.

There are likely others.

## Design Details

We are still ironing out the high level goals and approach.  Several
earlier proposals have been floated, as listed next.  This section
contains a discussion of the issues.

- [Min Kim's original proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12xAkRcSq9hZVEpcO56EIiEYmd0ivybWo4YRXV0Nfq-8)

- [Mike Spreitzer's first proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YW_rYH6tvW0fvny5b7yEZXvwDZ1-qtA-uMNnHW9gNpQ)

- [Daniel Smith's proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BtwFyB6G3JgYOaTxPjQD-tKHXaIYTByKlwlqLE0RUrk)

Also notable are notes from a meeting on this subject, at
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bEh2BqfSSr3jyh1isnXDdmfe6koKd_kMXCFj08uldf8
.

Following is an attempt to summarize the issues addressed in those
proposals and the current thinking on them; the current proposal
attempts to respond.

Despite the open issues, we seem to be roughly agreed on an outline
something like the following.

- When a request arrives at the handler, the request is categorized
  somehow.  The nature of the categories and the categorization
  process is one open issue. Some proposals (not written yet) allow
  for the request to be rejected upon arrival based on that
  categorization and some local state.  Unless rejected, the request
  is put into a FIFO queue.  That is one of many queues.  The queues
  are associated with the categories somehow.  Some proposals
  contemplate ejecting less desirable requests to make room for the
  newly queued request, if and when queue space is tight.

- A request might also be rejected at a later time, based on other
  criteria.  For example, as in the CoDel technique --- which will
  reject a request at the head of the queue if the latency is found to
  be too big at certain times.

- Based on some resource limit (e.g., QPS or concurrency) and with
  regards to priority and fairness criteria, requests are dispatched
  from the queues to be served (i.e., continue down the handler
  chain).

- We assume that when the requst-timeout handler aborts a request it
  is effective --- we assume the request stops consuming CPU and
  memory at that point.  We know that this is not actually true today,
  but is intended; we leave fixing that to be independent work, and
  for now this KEP simply ignores the gap.

One of the biggest questions is how to formulate the scheduling
parameters.  There are several related concepts in the state of the
art of scheduling, and we are trying to figure out what to adopt
and/or invent.  We would prefer to invent as little as possible; it is
a non-trivial thing to invent a new --- and sufficiently efficient ---
scheduling algorithm and prove it correct.  The vmware product line
uses scheduling parameters named "reservation", "limit", and "shares"
for each class of workload.  The first two are known elsewhere as
"assured" and "ceiling".  Finding a published algorithm that
implements all three has not proven easy.  Alternatively, priorities
are easy to implement and arguably more desirable --- provided there
is some form of fairness within each priority level.  The current
thinking is in that direction: use priorities, with simple equal
fairness among some categories of requests in each priority level.
There are published scheduling algorithms that provide fairness, and
we hope to use/adapt one of them to apply independently within the
confines of each priroity level.

Another issue is whether to manage QPS or concurrency or what.
Managing QPS leaps first to mind, perhaps because it is a simple
concept and perhaps because it is familiar from the self-restraint
that clients apply today.  But we want to also take service time into
account; a request flow with longer service times should get less QPS
because its requests are "heavier" --- they impose more load on the
apiserver.  A natural way to do this is with an inverse linear
relation.  For example, when two CPU-bound request flows are getting
equal CPU from the apiserver, and the first flow's requests have a
service time that is X times the service time of the second flow's
requests, the first flow's QPS is 1/X of the second's.  This is
exactly analogous to what happens in networking: if two flows are
getting the same bandwidth, and one flow's packets are X times as big
as the second's, then the first flow's packets per second rate is 1/X
that of the second flow.  This inverse linear relation amounts to
managing the product of QPS * service time.  That is equivalent to
managing concurrency.  Managing concurrency is an obvious choice for
memory, and we now see it is a good choice for CPU too.  This is also
a convenient choice because it is what the max-in-flight handler is
doing today, so we would be making a relatively modest extension to
that hendler's conception.

Compared to traditional scheduling problems, ours is harder because of
the combination of these facts: (1) (unlike a router handling a
packet) the apiserver does not know beforehand how long a request will
take to serve nor how much memory it will consume, and (2) (unlike a
CPU scheduler) the apiserver can not suspend and resume requests.
Also, we are really loathe to abort a request once it has started
being served.  We are leaning towards adapting well known and studied
scheduling technique(s); but adaptation is a form of invention, and we
have not converged yet on what to do here.

Another issue is how to combine two goals: protection of CPU, and
protection of memory.  A related issue is the fact that there are two
stages of memory consumption: a request held in a queue holds some
memory, and a request being served may use a lot more.  The current
thinking seems to be focusing on using one QPS or concurrency limit on
requests being served, on the expectation that this limit can be set
to a value that provides reasonable protection for both CPU and memory
without being too low for either.

If we only limmit requests being served then the queues could cause
two problems: consuming a lot of apiserver memory, and introducing a
lot of latency.  For the latter we are aware of some solutions from
the world of networking, [CoDel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CoDel)
and
[fq_codel](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-aqm-fq-codel-06).
CoDel is a technique for ejecting requests from a queue for the
purpose of keeping latency low, and fq_codel applies the CoDel
technique in each of many queues.  CoDel is explicitly designed to
work in the context of TCP flows on the Internet.  This KEP should be
similarly explicit about the context, particularly including what is
the feedback given to clients and how do they react and what is the
net effect of all the interacting pieces.  No such analysis has yet
been done for any of the proposals.

The CoDel technique is described as parameterless but has two magic
numbers: an "initial interval" of 100 ms and a "target" of 5 ms.  The
initial interval is set based on round trip times in the Internet, and
the target is set based on a desired limit on the latency at each hop.
What are the analogous numbers for our scenario?  We do not have large
numbers of hops; typically at most two (client to main apiserver and
then main apiserver to aggregated apiserver).  What is analogous to
network round trip time?  We have a latency goal of 1 second, and a
request service time limit of 1 minute.  If we take 1 second as the
initial interval then note that the maximum service time is much
larger than the initial interval; by contrast, in networking, the
maximum service time (i.e., packet length / link speed) is much
smaller than the initial interval.  Even if we take 1 minute as our
initial interval, we still do not have the sort of relationship that
obtains in networking.  Note that in order to get good statistics on a
queue --- which is needed by the CoDel technique --- there have to be
many requests served during an interval.  Because of this mismatch,
and because equivalence of context has not been established, we are
not agreed that the CoDel technique can be used.

Note that the resource limit being applied is a distinct concept from
the fairness criteria.  For example, in CPU scheduling there may be 4
CPUs and 50 threads being scheduled onto those CPUs; we do not suppose
the goal is to have each thread to be using 0.08 CPUs at each instant;
a thread uses eitehr 0 or 1 CPUs at a given instant.  Similarly, in
networking, a router may multiplex a thousand flows onto one link; the
goal is not to have each flow use 1/1000th of the link at each
instant; a packet uses 0 links while queued and 1 link while being
transmitted.  Each CPU or link is used for just one thing at a time;
this is the resource limit.  The fairness goal is about utilization
observed over time.  So it is in our scenario too.  For example, we
may have 5000 flows of requests and a concurrency limit of 600
requests at any one time.  That does not mean that our goal is for
each flow to have 0.12 requests running at each instant.  Our goal is
to limit the number of running requests to 600 at each instant and
provide some fairness in utilization averaged over time.

That average over time must not be over too much or too little time.
It would not make sense to average over all past time; that would
allow a flow to build up a huge amount of credit, enabling it to crowd
out other flows.  It also does not make sense for the average to cover
a small amount of time.  Because serving requests, like transmitting
packets, is lumpy we must average over many service times.  Approaches
to this include: using a sequence of intervals, using a sliding
window, and using an exponential decay.

Another open issue is the categorization: what are the categories and
how is a request assigned to a category?  We seem to be agreed on at
least one important point: each request is assigned to exactly one
category, and is handled by exactly one "bucket" or "queue".  We also
seem to be converging toward a two-level hierarchy of categories,
aligned with the handling outline discussed earlier: at the higher
level there are priorities, and within each priority level there is a
collection of flows that compete fairly.

One question is whether the prioritization is strict, or there is some
sort of leakage between priority levels.  Leakage is problematic
because it weakens the semantics of priority. Pracitally, leakage may
weaken that semantic to a large degree. Leakage may be motivated by
thinking that some low priority requests should be handled instead of
high priority requests in some circumstances. Such circumstances
should be clearly identified. If the thinking is that priority
inversions are impossible to avoid then that should be explained as
such.

For the higher level of categorization --- i.e., into priority levels
--- the idea is that this is based on a configured set of predicate =>
priority associations.  The predicate can test any authenticated
request attribute --- notably including both client identity and the
work being requested.  One issue to nail down is the question of what
happens if multiple predicates match a given request; the handler
should pick exactly one priority level for each request.

Within a given priority level we want to give a fair division of
capacity among several "flows"; the lower level of categorization is
how to compute a flow identifier from a request.

The handler may additionally hash the flows into queues, so that a
more manageable number of queues is involved.

## Implementation History

(none yet)

## Drawbacks

Increased burden on operator to provide good configuration.

Increase in stuff to consider when analyzing performance results.

Increased complexity of code to maintain.

Increased runtime costs.

## Alternatives

Once we have settled on a design there will be things to say about the
designs not chosen.

## Infrastructure Needed

The end-to-end test suite should exercise the functionality introduced
by this KEP.  This may require creating a special client to submit an
overload of low-priority work.
